operations/observability/mixins/README.md, before:

# Gitpod's Mixin

Gitpod's mixin is based on the [Prometheus Monitoring Mixins project](https://github.com/monitoring-mixins/docs/blob/master/design.pdf). Mixins are jsonnet packages that bundle together [Prometheus Alerts](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/alerting_rules/), [Prometheus Recording Rules](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/recording_rules/) and [Grafana Dashboards](https://grafana.com/grafana/).

## Table of contents

* [Folders and Teams](#Folders-and-Teams)
* [How to develop Dashboards](#How-to-develop-Dashboards)
    * [Grafonnet](#Grafonnet)
    * [Exporting JSONs from Grafana UI](#Exporting-JSONs-from-Grafana-UI)
* [How to develop Prometheus Alerts and Rules](#How-to-develop-Prometheus-Alerts-and-Rules)
    * [Recording Rules](#Recording-Rules)
    * [Alerts](#Alerts)
    * [Rules and Alerts validation](#Rules-and-Alerts-validation)
* [Deploying merged changes to production](#Deploying-merged-changes-to-production)
* [Frequently asked Questions](#FAQ)
    * [Any recommendations when developing new dashboards?](#Any-recommendations-when-developing-new-dashboards)
    * [How is our mixin consumed?](#How-is-our-mixin-consumed)
    * [How do I review dashboards before merging PRs?](#How-do-I-review-dashboards-before-merging-PRs)
    * [Do I configure alerting routes in the mixin?](#Do-I-configure-alerting-routes-in-the-mixin)


## Folders and Teams

Folders are organized following Gitpod as an organization, while also adding an extra folder for dashboards and alerts that involves multiple teams (Good place for broad overviews and SLOs):
* Meta
* Workspace
* IDE
* Cross-Teams (For dashboards and alerts that are co-owned by more than one team)

We've organized our mixins to make it easier to each team to own their dashboards and alerts. Every team has its own folder with a `mixin.libsonnet` file, which imports all dashboards and alerts from the subfolders.

It doesn't matter how the imports inside the subfolders work, it is only important that all dashboards end up in a `grafanaDashboards` object, all alerts in the `prometheusAlerts` object and all recording rules in the `prometheusRules` object. [Read more about jsonnet objects](https://jsonnet.org/ref/language.html).

From past experiences, the platform team suggests that dashboards and alerts get split by component inside the subfolders because, so far, we haven't implemented metrics that involves more than a single component operation.


## How to develop Dashboards

### Grafonnet

Grafana provides a jsonnet library, called [Grafonnet](https://github.com/grafana/grafonnet-lib/tree/master/grafonnet), that can help us develop Grafana dashboards while keeping amount of code low.

Instead of creating a gigantic JSON, you can use grafonnet and make a dashboard that is a lot easier to review in Pull Requests. For example:

```jsonnet
// content of my-team/dashboards/my-new-dashboard.libsonnet
local grafana = import 'grafonnet/grafana.libsonnet';
local dashboard = grafana.dashboard;
local row = grafana.row;
local prometheus = grafana.prometheus;
local template = grafana.template;
local graphPanel = grafana.graphPanel;
local template = grafana.template;

local datasourceVariable = {
  hide: 0,
  name: 'datasource',
  query: 'prometheus',
  refresh: 1,
  type: 'datasource',
};

local runningWorkspacesGraph =
  graphPanel.new(
    'Running Workspaces',
    datasource='$datasource',
    format='none',
    stack=false,
    fill=1,
    fillGradient=5,
    min=0,
  )
  .addTarget(
      prometheus.target(
          |||
            sum(
              gitpod_ws_manager_workspace_phase_total{phase="RUNNING"}
            ) by (type)
          |||, legendFormat='{{ type }}'
      )
  );

{
    'my-new-dashboard.json': dashboard.new(
    'My new dashboard!',
    time_from='now-1h',
    timezone='utc',
    refresh='30s',
    )
    .addTemplate(datasourceVariable)
    .addPanel(runningWorkspacesGraph)
    ,
}




/*******************************/
// content of my-team/dashboards.libsonnet
{
    grafanaDashboards+:: {
        // other dashboards
        ...
        ...
        ...
        'my-new-dashboard.json': (import 'my-team/dashboards/my-new-dashboard.libsonnet'),
    }
}
```

To make sure your jsonnet code compiles and is well-formated, you can always run `make lint`.

You can also use our [preview environments to make sure the dashboard really looks like what you imagined](#How-do-I-review-dashboards-before-merging-PRs).

### Exporting JSONs from Grafana UI

[Jsonnet is a simple extension of JSON](https://jsonnet.org/), which means that valid JSON is also valid Jsonnet.

Grafana has built-in functionality that lets us export dashboards as JSON files, which we can import to our mixins. Below you find a quick video explaining how to add a new dashboard to our mixin, exporting from Grafana's UI.

https://www.loom.com/share/23356f272a894801acc4f16bb3fd635a

## How to develop Prometheus Alerts and Rules

### Recording Rules

[Recording rules](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/recording_rules/) is a feature of Prometheus that pre-computes the value of a PromQL expression and saves it into a brand-new metric. This brand new metric can then be used in Alerts and Dashboards. Recording rules are often used to:

* Pre-calculate expensive queries that often freezes Grafana Dashboards
* Simplify alerts that may require super complicated queries. Instead of adding a new alert with a super complicated query, create a new metric with its value and alert on this new metric.

It doesn't matter how they are imported from each teams' `mixin.libsonnet` file, the only requirement is that they endup in an object called `prometheusRules`.

Some examples!

Importing json files:
```jsonnet
// content of my-team/rules/components/my-component/rules.json
{
  "groups": [
    {
      "name": "example",
      "rules": [
        {
          "record": "instance_path:requests:rate5m",
          "expr": "rate(requests_total{job=\"myjob\"}[5m])"
        },
        {
          "record": "path:requests:rate5m",
          "expr": "sum without (instance)(instance_path:requests:rate5m{job=\"myjob\"})"
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}


// content of my-team/rules/components.libsonnet
{
  prometheusRules+:: {} +
  (import './my-component/rules.json'),
}
```

Directly importing inside the `prometheusRules` object:
```jsonnet
// content of my-team/rules/components.libsonnet
{
  prometheusRules+:: {
    groups+: [
      {
        name: 'example',
        rules: [
          {
            record: 'instance_path:requests:rate5m',
            expr: 'rate(requests_total{job="myjob"}[5m])',
          },
          {
            record: 'path:requests:rate5m',
            expr: 'sum without (instance)(instance_path:requests:rate5m{job="myjob"})',
          },
        ],
      },
    ],
  },
}
```

When developing new recording rules, please use [Prometheus' recording rule naming convention](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/rules/).

### Alerts

[Alerting rules](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/alerting_rules/) are definitions of alerts, where you can optionally include additional metadata to them.

Alerting rules that we develop have a direct impact on the reliability of our systems, and also on the pressure put on top of the person on-call. To make the duty of the person on-call more efficient, and reduce stress at the same time, we require that every new `critical` alert has a corresponding runbook at the [observability repository](https://github.com/gitpod-io/observability). Please don't forget to open a new Pull Request there!

It doesn't matter how they are imported from each teams' `mixin.libsonnet` file, the only requirement is that they end up in an object called `prometheusAlerts`.

Some examples!

Importing json files:
```jsonnet
// content of my-team/rules/components/my-component/alerts.json
{
  "groups": [
    {
      "name": "example",
      "rules": [
        {
          "alert": "HighRequestLatency",
          "expr": "job:request_latency_seconds:mean5m{job=\"myjob\"} > 0.5",
          "for": "10m",
          "labels": {
            "severity": "critical"
          },
          "annotations": {
            "summary": "High request latency"
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}


// content of my-team/rules/components.libsonnet
{
  prometheusAlerts+:: {} +
  (import './my-component/alerts.json'),
}
```

Directly importing inside the `prometheusAlerts` object:
```jsonnet
// content of my-team/rules/components.libsonnet
{
  prometheusAlerts+:: {
    groups: [
      {
        name: 'example',
        rules: [
          {
            alert: 'HighRequestLatency',
            expr: 'job:request_latency_seconds:mean5m{job="myjob"} > 0.5',
            'for': '10m',
            labels: {
              severity: 'page',
            },
            annotations: {
              summary: 'High request latency',
            },
          },
        ],
      },
    ],
  },
}
```

For further explanation of Prometheus Alerts, please head to the [official documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/alerting_rules/).


### Rules and Alerts validation

You can use our Makefile to make sure the alerts and recording rules you've created are valid (They will break prometheus if they aren't).

By running `make promtool-lint`, you'll generate a new file called `prometheus_alerts.yaml` with all teams' recording rules and alerts together, and also use the `promtool` binary to validate all of them.

We also have this same validation running in our CI, to make sure we don't merge stuff that can break our monitoring system.

## Deploying merged changes to production

Alright, you got your changes merged, now what? The changes need to land on our [gitpod-io/observability](https://github.com/gitpod-io/observability) repository by updating the `vendor/` folder.

The `vendor/` folder can be updated by triggering this [workflow](https://github.com/gitpod-io/observability/actions/workflows/dep-update.yaml). Yes, you just need to click the button and the workflow will open a new Pull Request with the updates.

After all CI checks pass, it is safe to merge the Pull Request. It is now ArgoCD's duty to synchronize the monitoring-satellite applications across all clusters. If you want to check progress, you can do that through [ArgoCD UI](https://argo-cd.gitpod-io-dev.com/applications?labels=application%253Dmonitoring-satellite).

## FAQ

### Any recommendations when developing new dashboards?

Each team owns their dashboards, feel free to create what is the most useful to you. We only recommend keeping things simple.

It's tempting to add every simple piece of information in a dashboard, however, it adds a lot of noise and you soon have a hard time finding what you really care about.

[The Prometheus team has some good recommendations that you could follow.](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/consoles/)

### How is our mixin consumed?

They are consumed by our git repository with the monitoring system configuration. To be more precise, a jsonnet package manager(jsonnet-bundler) can import jsonnet code from git repositories, as long as they are added to the [jsonnetfile.json](https://github.com/gitpod-io/observability/blob/main/jsonnetfile.json).

This `jsonnetfile.json` lists all dependencies that we use, which includes this very mixin. While also pointing to the specific version of each dependency(A git branch or commit SHA).

### How do I review dashboards before merging PRs?

There are a couple of ways to trigger a werft job that will deploy a preview environment with Prometheus+Grafana with your changes:

1. You can open a Pull Request with the following line in the description:
```
/werft with-observability

# Just in case your PR requires extra configuration on Prometheus side
# (and you have a new branch on https://github.com/gitpod-io/observability with such changes)
# you can add the line below
/werft withObservabilityBranch="<my-branch>"
```

2. After opening a Pull Request, you can add a Github comment:
```
/werft run with-observability
/werft run withObservabilityBranch="<my-branch>"
```

3. Inside your workspace, run:
```
werft run github -a with-observability="" -a withObservabilityBranch="<my-branch>"
```

As mentioned in [How is our mixin consumed?](#How-is-our-mixin-consumed), please remember that a commit must be done for us to update monitoring-satellite with the dashboards/alerts/recording rule changes.

Please remember that the annotation `withObservabilityBranch` is completely optional, and most of the time you won't need it at all.

### Do I configure alerting routes in the mixin?

No, mixins only contains alerts definition. The routing is done by alertmanager, which is configured in another git repository.

Commit message:

track git command initial
Add the TrackEvent type struct

Reference fixes

Only require one flag

Better function description

go fmt

Update components/gitpod-cli/cmd/git-track-command.go

Co-authored-by: bigint <bigint@icloud.com>

fixes

Log the correct vars and correct error messages

Set test data

Remove more unused code

go fmt

More go fmt

Mock `TrackEvent`

Fix destination of `gitCommand`

Fix function references

Spawn the git command tracker automatically

Correct the script name

Don't expect any results

Don't return on error with tracker

Use new connection syntax

`go fmt`

Set the correct type for params, rename args

`go fmt`

Fix param type names

Add resource scope

Move process release to an `else` block

Make `TrackEvent` types emulate the backend

Format

`go fmt`

Only use the one required scope

Close the client after returning

Change description

[changelog] updated changelog

Setup IdentitiesOnly as yes in ssh config

Fixes #7335

Handle "no data" by adding 'on() vector(0)' to each numerator
Relies on new variable $datasource
Also fixes legend for workspace startup panel
When exporting from Grafana, disable "export for sharing externally"

Helm is needed to support Observability

[changelog] updated changelog

add missing condition for ide-proxy heml chart

Improve label colors on dashboard integrations for the dark theme

Send headers when connecting to the supervisor

Create the version file during build

operations/observability/mixins/README.md, after:

# Gitpod's Mixin

Gitpod's mixin is based on the [Prometheus Monitoring Mixins project](https://github.com/monitoring-mixins/docs/blob/master/design.pdf). Mixins are jsonnet packages that bundle together [Prometheus Alerts](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/alerting_rules/), [Prometheus Recording Rules](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/recording_rules/) and [Grafana Dashboards](https://grafana.com/grafana/).

## Table of contents

* [Folders and Teams](#Folders-and-Teams)
* [How to develop Dashboards](#How-to-develop-Dashboards)
    * [Grafonnet](#Grafonnet)
    * [Exporting JSONs from Grafana UI](#Exporting-JSONs-from-Grafana-UI)
* [How to develop Prometheus Alerts and Rules](#How-to-develop-Prometheus-Alerts-and-Rules)
    * [Recording Rules](#Recording-Rules)
    * [Alerts](#Alerts)
    * [Rules and Alerts validation](#Rules-and-Alerts-validation)
* [Deploying merged changes to production](#Deploying-merged-changes-to-production)
* [Frequently asked Questions](#FAQ)
    * [Any recommendations when developing new dashboards?](#Any-recommendations-when-developing-new-dashboards)
    * [How is our mixin consumed?](#How-is-our-mixin-consumed)
    * [How do I review dashboards before merging PRs?](#How-do-I-review-dashboards-before-merging-PRs)
    * [Do I configure alerting routes in the mixin?](#Do-I-configure-alerting-routes-in-the-mixin)


## Folders and Teams

Folders are organized following Gitpod as an organization, while also adding an extra folder for dashboards and alerts that involves multiple teams (Good place for broad overviews and SLOs):
* Meta
* Workspace
* IDE
* Cross-Teams (For dashboards and alerts that are co-owned by more than one team)

We've organized our mixins to make it easier to each team to own their dashboards and alerts. Every team has its own folder with a `mixin.libsonnet` file, which imports all dashboards and alerts from the subfolders.

It doesn't matter how the imports inside the subfolders work, it is only important that all dashboards end up in a `grafanaDashboards` object, all alerts in the `prometheusAlerts` object and all recording rules in the `prometheusRules` object. [Read more about jsonnet objects](https://jsonnet.org/ref/language.html).

From past experiences, the platform team suggests that dashboards and alerts get split by component inside the subfolders because, so far, we haven't implemented metrics that involves more than a single component operation.


## How to develop Dashboards

### Grafonnet

Grafana provides a jsonnet library, called [Grafonnet](https://github.com/grafana/grafonnet-lib/tree/master/grafonnet), that can help us develop Grafana dashboards while keeping amount of code low.

Instead of creating a gigantic JSON, you can use grafonnet and make a dashboard that is a lot easier to review in Pull Requests. For example:

```jsonnet
// content of my-team/dashboards/my-new-dashboard.libsonnet
local grafana = import 'grafonnet/grafana.libsonnet';
local dashboard = grafana.dashboard;
local row = grafana.row;
local prometheus = grafana.prometheus;
local template = grafana.template;
local graphPanel = grafana.graphPanel;
local template = grafana.template;

local datasourceVariable = {
  hide: 0,
  name: 'datasource',
  query: 'prometheus',
  refresh: 1,
  type: 'datasource',
};

local runningWorkspacesGraph =
  graphPanel.new(
    'Running Workspaces',
    datasource='$datasource',
    format='none',
    stack=false,
    fill=1,
    fillGradient=5,
    min=0,
  )
  .addTarget(
      prometheus.target(
          |||
            sum(
              gitpod_ws_manager_workspace_phase_total{phase="RUNNING"}
            ) by (type)
          |||, legendFormat='{{ type }}'
      )
  );

{
    'my-new-dashboard.json': dashboard.new(
    'My new dashboard!',
    time_from='now-1h',
    timezone='utc',
    refresh='30s',
    )
    .addTemplate(datasourceVariable)
    .addPanel(runningWorkspacesGraph)
    ,
}




/*******************************/
// content of my-team/dashboards.libsonnet
{
    grafanaDashboards+:: {
        // other dashboards
        ...
        ...
        ...
        'my-new-dashboard.json': (import 'my-team/dashboards/my-new-dashboard.libsonnet'),
    }
}
```

To make sure your jsonnet code compiles and is well-formated, you can always run `make lint`.

You can also use our [preview environments to make sure the dashboard really looks like what you imagined](#How-do-I-review-dashboards-before-merging-PRs).

### Exporting JSONs from Grafana UI

[Jsonnet is a simple extension of JSON](https://jsonnet.org/), which means that valid JSON is also valid Jsonnet.

Grafana has built-in functionality that lets us export dashboards as JSON files, which we can import to our mixins. Below you find a quick video explaining how to add a new dashboard to our mixin, exporting from Grafana's UI.

https://www.loom.com/share/23356f272a894801acc4f16bb3fd635a

## How to develop Prometheus Alerts and Rules

### Recording Rules

[Recording rules](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/recording_rules/) is a feature of Prometheus that pre-computes the value of a PromQL expression and saves it into a brand-new metric. This brand new metric can then be used in Alerts and Dashboards. Recording rules are often used to:

* Pre-calculate expensive queries that often freezes Grafana Dashboards
* Simplify alerts that may require super complicated queries. Instead of adding a new alert with a super complicated query, create a new metric with its value and alert on this new metric.

It doesn't matter how they are imported from each teams' `mixin.libsonnet` file, the only requirement is that they endup in an object called `prometheusRules`.

Some examples!

Importing json files:
```jsonnet
// content of my-team/rules/components/my-component/rules.json
{
  "groups": [
    {
      "name": "example",
      "rules": [
        {
          "record": "instance_path:requests:rate5m",
          "expr": "rate(requests_total{job=\"myjob\"}[5m])"
        },
        {
          "record": "path:requests:rate5m",
          "expr": "sum without (instance)(instance_path:requests:rate5m{job=\"myjob\"})"
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}


// content of my-team/rules/components.libsonnet
{
  prometheusRules+:: {} +
  (import './my-component/rules.json'),
}
```

Directly importing inside the `prometheusRules` object:
```jsonnet
// content of my-team/rules/components.libsonnet
{
  prometheusRules+:: {
    groups+: [
      {
        name: 'example',
        rules: [
          {
            record: 'instance_path:requests:rate5m',
            expr: 'rate(requests_total{job="myjob"}[5m])',
          },
          {
            record: 'path:requests:rate5m',
            expr: 'sum without (instance)(instance_path:requests:rate5m{job="myjob"})',
          },
        ],
      },
    ],
  },
}
```

When developing new recording rules, please use [Prometheus' recording rule naming convention](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/rules/).

### Alerts

[Alerting rules](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/alerting_rules/) are definitions of alerts, where you can optionally include additional metadata to them.

Alerting rules that we develop have a direct impact on the reliability of our systems, and also on the pressure put on top of the person on-call. To make the duty of the person on-call more efficient, and reduce stress at the same time, we require that every new `critical` alert has a corresponding runbook at the [observability repository](https://github.com/gitpod-io/observability). Please don't forget to open a new Pull Request there!

It doesn't matter how they are imported from each teams' `mixin.libsonnet` file, the only requirement is that they end up in an object called `prometheusAlerts`.

Some examples!

Importing json files:
```jsonnet
// content of my-team/rules/components/my-component/alerts.json
{
  "groups": [
    {
      "name": "example",
      "rules": [
        {
          "alert": "HighRequestLatency",
          "expr": "job:request_latency_seconds:mean5m{job=\"myjob\"} > 0.5",
          "for": "10m",
          "labels": {
            "severity": "critical"
          },
          "annotations": {
            "summary": "High request latency"
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}


// content of my-team/rules/components.libsonnet
{
  prometheusAlerts+:: {} +
  (import './my-component/alerts.json'),
}
```

Directly importing inside the `prometheusAlerts` object:
```jsonnet
// content of my-team/rules/components.libsonnet
{
  prometheusAlerts+:: {
    groups: [
      {
        name: 'example',
        rules: [
          {
            alert: 'HighRequestLatency',
            expr: 'job:request_latency_seconds:mean5m{job="myjob"} > 0.5',
            'for': '10m',
            labels: {
              severity: 'page',
            },
            annotations: {
              summary: 'High request latency',
            },
          },
        ],
      },
    ],
  },
}
```

For further explanation of Prometheus Alerts, please head to the [official documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/alerting_rules/).


### Rules and Alerts validation

You can use our Makefile to make sure the alerts and recording rules you've created are valid (They will break prometheus if they aren't).

By running `make promtool-lint`, you'll generate a new file called `prometheus_alerts.yaml` with all teams' recording rules and alerts together, and also use the `promtool` binary to validate all of them.

We also have this same validation running in our CI, to make sure we don't merge stuff that can break our monitoring system.

## Deploying merged changes to production

Alright, you got your changes merged, now what? The changes need to land on our [gitpod-io/observability](https://github.com/gitpod-io/observability) repository by updating the `vendor/` folder.

The `vendor/` folder can be updated by triggering this [workflow](https://github.com/gitpod-io/observability/actions/workflows/dep-update.yaml). Yes, you just need to click the button and the workflow will open a new Pull Request with the updates.

After all CI checks pass, it is safe to merge the Pull Request. It is now ArgoCD's duty to synchronize the monitoring-satellite applications across all clusters. If you want to check progress, you can do that through [ArgoCD UI](https://argo-cd.gitpod-io-dev.com/applications?labels=application%253Dmonitoring-satellite).

## FAQ

### Any recommendations when developing new dashboards?

Each team owns their dashboards, feel free to create what is the most useful to you. We only recommend keeping things simple.

It's tempting to add every simple piece of information in a dashboard, however, it adds a lot of noise and you soon have a hard time finding what you really care about.

[The Prometheus team has some good recommendations that you could follow.](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/consoles/)

### How is our mixin consumed?

They are consumed by our git repository with the monitoring system configuration. To be more precise, a jsonnet package manager(jsonnet-bundler) can import jsonnet code from git repositories, as long as they are added to the [jsonnetfile.json](https://github.com/gitpod-io/observability/blob/main/jsonnetfile.json).

This `jsonnetfile.json` lists all dependencies that we use, which includes this very mixin. While also pointing to the specific version of each dependency(A git branch or commit SHA).

### How do I review dashboards before merging PRs?

There are a couple of ways to trigger a werft job that will deploy a preview environment with Prometheus+Grafana with your changes:

1. You can open a Pull Request with the following line in the description:
```
# we deploy using K8s manifests generated by our new installer
# observability only works with our old helm chart
# to support observability, use with-helm will;
/werft with-observability with-helm

# Just in case your PR requires extra configuration on Prometheus side
# (and you have a new branch on https://github.com/gitpod-io/observability with such changes)
# you can add the line below
/werft withObservabilityBranch="<my-branch>"
```

2. After opening a Pull Request, you can add a Github comment:
```
/werft run with-observability with-helm
/werft run withObservabilityBranch="<my-branch>" with-observability
```

3. Inside your workspace, run:
```
werft run github -a with-observability=true -a withObservabilityBranch="<my-branch>" -a with-helm=true
```

As mentioned in [How is our mixin consumed?](#How-is-our-mixin-consumed), please remember that a commit must be done for us to update monitoring-satellite with the dashboards/alerts/recording rule changes.

Please remember that the annotation `withObservabilityBranch` is completely optional, and most of the time you won't need it at all.

### Do I configure alerting routes in the mixin?

No, mixins only contains alerts definition. The routing is done by alertmanager, which is configured in another git repository.
