installer/README.md, before:

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://www.gitpod.io">
    <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/master/components/dashboard/src/icons/gitpod.svg" height="60">
    <h3 align="center">Gitpod</h3>
  </a>
  <p align="center">Always ready-to-code.</p>
</p>

# Installer

The best way to get started with Gitpod

[![Gitpod ready-to-code](https://img.shields.io/badge/Gitpod-ready--to--code-908a85?logo=gitpod)](https://gitpod.io/from-referrer/)

# Requirements

- A machine running Linux/MacOS and Docker
    - Windows is not currently supported, but will be in future
- [Kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl) installed
- A [Kubernetes cluster configured](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/self-hosted/latest/installation)
- A [TLS certificate](#tls-certificates)

Or, [open a Gitpod workspace](https://gitpod.io/from-referer/)

The process to install Gitpod is:
1. generate a base config
2. amend the config for your own use-case
3. validate
4. render the Kubernetes YAML
5. `kubectl apply`

# Quickstart

## Get your binary

> There is work to be done on improving the distribution of the binary
> [#6766](https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/issues/6766).

From [werft](https://werft.gitpod-dev.com), search for the tag you want, such as
`main.1919` - set this value to `$TAG`

### Option 1 - download the pre-build Installer

```shell
docker create -ti --name installer eu.gcr.io/gitpod-core-dev/build/installer:$TAG
docker cp installer:/app/installer ./installer
docker rm -f installer
```

### Option 2 - use `go run`

```shell
# Get the versions
docker run -it --rm eu.gcr.io/gitpod-core-dev/build/versions:$TAG cat /versions.yaml > versions.yaml
```

For every command below, replace `installer` with `go run . --debug-version-file ./versions.yaml`.

## Generate the base config

```shell
./installer init > gitpod.config.yaml
```

## Customise your config

There are many things you can change in your config, which can be found in
the [Config Guide](#config).

For the purposes of a quickstart, just change the `domain` to one of your
own.

## Validate

```shell
# Checks the validity of the configuration YAML
./installer validate config --config gitpod.config.yaml
```

Any errors here must be fixed before deploying. See [Config](#config) for
more details.

```shell
# Checks that your cluster is ready to install Gitpod
./installer validate cluster --kubeconfig ~/.kube/config --config gitpod.config.yaml
```

Any errors here must be fixed before deploying. See [Cluster Dependencies](#cluster-dependencies)
for more details.

## Render the YAML

```shell
./installer render --config gitpod.config.yaml > gitpod.yaml
```

## Deploy

```shell
kubectl apply -f gitpod.yaml
```

After a few minutes, your Gitpod installation will be available on the
specified `domain`.

## Uninstallation

The Installer generates a ConfigMap with the metadata of every Kubernetes
object generated by the Installer. This can be retrieved to remove Gitpod
from your cluster.

```shell
kubectl get configmaps gitpod-app -o jsonpath='{.data.app\.yaml}' \
  | kubectl delete -f - # Piping to this will delete automatically
```

**Important**. This may leave certain objects still in your Kubernetes
cluster. This will include `Secrets` generated from internal `Certificates`
and `PersistentVolumeClaims`. These will need to be manually deleted.

---

# What is installed

- All Gitpod components
- Container registry*
- MySQL database*
- Jaeger operator*
- RabbitMQ
- Minio object storage*

\* By default, these dependencies are installed if the `inCluster` setting
is `true`. External dependencies can be used in their place

# Config

> Not every parameter is discussed in this table, just ones that are likely
> to need changing. The full config structure is available in [config.go](/installer/pkg/config/v1/config.go).

| Property | Required | Description | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `domain` | Y | The domain to deploy to | This will need to be changed on every deployment |
| `kind` | Y | Installation type to run - for most users, this will be `Full` | Can be `Full`, `Meta` or `Workspace` |
| `metadata.region` | Y | Location for your `objectStorage` provider | If using Minio, set to `local` |
| `workspace.runtime.containerdRuntimeDir` | Y | The location of containerd on host machine | Common values are: <ul><li>`/run/containerd/io.containerd.runtime.v2.task/k8s.io` (K3s)</li><li>`/var/lib/containerd/io.containerd.runtime.v2.task/k8s.io` (AWS/Azure/GCP)</li><li>`/run/containerd/io.containerd.runtime.v1.linux/k8s.io`</li><li>`/run/containerd/io.containerd.runtime.v1.linux/moby`</li></ul> |
| `workspace.runtime.containerdSocket` | Y | The location of containerd socket on the host machine |
| `workspace.runtime.fsShiftMethod` | Y | File system | Can be either `fuse` (fuse-overlayfs) or `shiftfs`. This depending upon your host OS/distribution. If unsure, use `fuse`. |

## Auth Providers

Gitpod must be connected to a Git provider. This can be done via the
dashboard on first load, or by providing `authProviders` configuration
as a Kubernetes secret.

### Setting via config

1. Update your configuration file:

```yaml
authProviders:
  - kind: secret
    name: public-github
```

2. Create a secret file:

```yaml
# Save this public-github.yaml

id: Public-GitHub
host: github.com
type: GitHub
oauth:
  clientId: xxx
  clientSecret: xxx
  callBackUrl: https://$DOMAIN/auth/github.com/callback
  settingsUrl: xxx
```

3. Create the secret:

```shell
kubectl create secret generic --from-file=provider=./public-github.yaml public-github
```

## In-cluster vs External Dependencies

Gitpod requires certain services for it to function correctly. The Installer
provides all of these in-cluster, but they can be configured to use services
external to the cluster.

To use the in-cluster dependency, set `inCluster` to be `true`.

## Container Registry

```yaml
containerRegistry:
  inCluster: false
  external:
    url: <url of registry>
    certificate:
      kind: secret
      name: container-registry-token
```

The `container-registry-token` secret must contain a `.dockerconfigjson`
key - this can be created by using the `kubectl create secret docker-registry`
[command](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/pull-image-private-registry/#create-a-secret-by-providing-credentials-on-the-command-line).

## Database

Gitpod requires an instance of MySQL 5.7 for data storage.

The default encryption keys are `[{"name":"general","version":1,"primary":true,"material":"4uGh1q8y2DYryJwrVMHs0kWXJlqvHWWt/KJuNi04edI="}]`

### Google Cloud SQL Proxy

If using a GCP SQL instance, a [Cloud SQL Proxy](https://cloud.google.com/sql/docs/mysql/sql-proxy)
connection can be used.

```yaml
database:
  inCluster: false
  cloudSQL:
    instance: <PROJECT_ID>:<REGION>:<INSTANCE>
    serviceAccount:
      kind: secret
      name: cloudsql-token
```

The `cloudsql-token` secret must contain the following key/value pairs:
 - `credentials.json` - GCP Service Account key with `roles/cloudsql.client` role
 - `encryptionKeys` - database encryption key. Use default value as above if unsure
 - `password` - database password
 - `username` - database username

### External Database

For all other connections, use an external database configuration.

```yaml
database:
  inCluster: false
  external:
    certificate:
      kind: secret
      name: database-token
```

The `database-token` secret must contain the following key/value pairs:
- `encryptionKeys` - database encryption key. Use default value as above if unsure
- `host` - IP or URL of the database
- `password` - database password
- `port` - database port, usually `3306`
- `username` - database username

## Object Storage

Gitpod supports the following object storage providers:

### GCP

```yaml
metadata:
  region: <gcp-region-code, eg europe-west2>
objectStorage:
  inCluster: false
  cloudStorage:
    project: <PROJECT_ID>
    serviceAccount:
      kind: secret
      name: gcp-storage-token
```

The `gcp-storage-token` secret must contain the following key/value pairs:
- `service-account.json` - GCP Service Account key with `roles/storage.admin` and `roles/storage.objectAdmin` roles

### Azure

> Azure Blob Storage is not S3 compatible. This uses Minio Gateway to
> provide an S3 interface

```yaml
metadata:
  region: <azure-region-code, eg northeurope>
objectStorage:
  inCluster: false
  azure:
    certificate:
      kind: secret
      name: az-storage-token
```

The `az-storage-token` secret must contain the following key/value pairs:
- `accountName` - the globally-unique storage account name
- `accountKey` - access key for the storage account

### S3

> This is currently only tested with AWS. Other S3-compatible providers should
> work but there may compatability issues - please raise a ticket if you have
> issues with other providers

```yaml
metadata:
  region: <aws-region-code, eg eu-west-2>
objectStorage:
  inCluster: false
  s3:
    endpoint: s3.amazonaws.com
    credentials:
      kind: secret
      name: s3-storage-token
```

The `s3-storage-token` secret must contain the following key/value pairs:
- `accessKeyId` - username that has access to S3 account
- `secretAccessKey` - password that has access to S3 account

> In AWS, the accessKeyId/secretAccessKey are an IAM user's credentials with
> `AmazonS3FullAccess` policy

# Cluster Dependencies

In order for the deployment to work successfully, there are certain
dependencies that need to be installed.

## Kernel and Runtime

Your Kubernetes nodes must have the Linux kernel v5.4.0 or above and
have a containerd runtime.

## Affinity Labels

Your Kubernetes nodes must have the following labels applied to them:
- `gitpod.io/workload_meta`
- `gitpod.io/workload_ide`
- `gitpod.io/workload_workspace_services`
- `gitpod.io/workload_workspace_regular`
- `gitpod.io/workload_workspace_headless`

It is recommended to have a minimum of two node pools, grouping the `meta`
and `ide` nodes together and the `workspace` nodes together.

## TLS certificates

It is a requirement that a certificate secret exists, named as per
`certificate.name` in your config YAML with `tls.crt` and `tls.key`
in the secret data. How this certificate is generated is entirely your
choice - we suggest [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/) for
simplicity, however any certificate authority can be used by creating a
Kubernetes secret.

The certificate must be associated with the following domains (where
`$DOMAIN` is the value in config `domain`):
 - `$DOMAIN`
 - `*.$DOMAIN`
 - `*.ws.$DOMAIN`

See [FAQs](#how-do-i-use-cert-manager-to-create-a-tls-certificate) for help
with creating a TLS certificate using cert-manager.

### cert-manager

cert-manager **MUST** be installed to your cluster. In order to secure
communication between the various components, the application creates
internally which are created using the cert-manager `Certificate` and
`Issuer` Custom Resource Definitions.

```shell
helm repo add jetstack https://charts.jetstack.io
helm repo update
helm upgrade \
    --atomic \
    --cleanup-on-fail \
    --create-namespace \
    --install \
    --namespace='cert-manager' \
    --reset-values \
    --set installCRDs=true \
    --set 'extraArgs={--dns01-recursive-nameservers-only=true,--dns01-recursive-nameservers=8.8.8.8:53\,1.1.1.1:53}' \
    --wait \
    cert-manager \
    jetstack/cert-manager
```

# FAQs

## Why are you writing your own Installer instead of using Helm/Kustomize/etc?

The Installer is a complete replacement for our Helm charts. Over time,
this had grown to be too complex to effectively support and was a barrier
to entry for new users - the base config was many hundreds of lines long
and did not have effective validation on it. By contrast, the Installer's
config is < 50 lines long and can be fully validated before running.

Also, by baking-in the container image versions to each release of the
Installer, we reduce the potential for variance making it easier to support
the community.

## How do I use Cert Manager to create a TLS certificate?

> Please see [cert-manager.io](https://cert-manager.io) for full documentation.
> This should be considered a quickstart guide.

There are two steps to creating a public TLS certificate using cert-manager.

### 1. Create the Issuer/ClusterIssuer

As the certificate is a wildcard certificate, you must use the DNS01 Challenge
Provider. Please consult their [documentation](https://cert-manager.io/docs/configuration/acme/dns01)
for instructions. This can be either an
[`Issuer` or `ClusterIssuer`](https://cert-manager.io/docs/concepts/issuer).

### 2. Create the certificate

Replace `$DOMAIN` with your domain. This example assumes you have created a
`ClusterIssuer` called `gitpod-issuer` - please change this if necessary.

This certificate is called `https-certificates` - please use that in your
Gitpod installer [config](#config).

```yaml
apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
kind: Certificate
metadata:
  name: https-certificates
spec:
  secretName: https-certificates
  issuerRef:
    name: gitpod-issuer
    kind: ClusterIssuer
  dnsNames:
    - $DOMAIN
    - "*.$DOMAIN"
    - "*.ws.$DOMAIN"
```

## How do I use my own TLS certificate?

If you don't wish to use cert-manager to create a TLS certificate with a public
certificate authority, you can bring your own.

To do this, generate your certificate as you would normally and then create a
secret with the CRT set to `tls.crt` and the Key set to `tls.key`.

The DNS names must be `$DOMAIN`, `*.$DOMAIN` and `*.ws.$DOMAIN`, where `$DOMAIN`
is your domain.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: https-certificates
data:
  tls.crt: xxx
  tls.key: xxx
```

## How can I install to a Kubernetes namespace?

By default, Gitpod will be installed to the `default`
[Kubernetes namespace](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/namespaces).
To install to a different namespace, pass a `namespace` flag to the `render`
command.

```shell
./installer render --config gitpod.config.yaml --namespace gitpod > gitpod.yaml
```

**IMPORTANT**: this does not create the namespace, so you will need to create
that separately. This is so that uninstallation of Gitpod does not remove any
Kubernetes objects, such as your TLS certificate or connection secrets.

```shell
kubectl create namespace gitpod
```

# Todo

PRs/comments welcome

- [ ] [Improve distribution of gitpod-installer binaries](https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/issues/6766)
- [ ] [Create a Gitpod workspace that can be used for installing a Gitpod instance](https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/issues/6801)

Commit message:

[installer]: grant option for disabling proxy load balancer
This will allow users to create their own ingress controller. An
example for NGINX Ingress is shown

installer/README.md, after:

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://www.gitpod.io">
    <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/master/components/dashboard/src/icons/gitpod.svg" height="60">
    <h3 align="center">Gitpod</h3>
  </a>
  <p align="center">Always ready-to-code.</p>
</p>

# Installer

The best way to get started with Gitpod

[![Gitpod ready-to-code](https://img.shields.io/badge/Gitpod-ready--to--code-908a85?logo=gitpod)](https://gitpod.io/from-referrer/)

# Requirements

- A machine running Linux/MacOS and Docker
    - Windows is not currently supported, but will be in future
- [Kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl) installed
- A [Kubernetes cluster configured](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/self-hosted/latest/installation)
- A [TLS certificate](#tls-certificates)

Or, [open a Gitpod workspace](https://gitpod.io/from-referer/)

The process to install Gitpod is:
1. generate a base config
2. amend the config for your own use-case
3. validate
4. render the Kubernetes YAML
5. `kubectl apply`

# Quickstart

## Get your binary

> There is work to be done on improving the distribution of the binary
> [#6766](https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/issues/6766).

From [werft](https://werft.gitpod-dev.com), search for the tag you want, such as
`main.1919` - set this value to `$TAG`

### Option 1 - download the pre-build Installer

```shell
docker create -ti --name installer eu.gcr.io/gitpod-core-dev/build/installer:$TAG
docker cp installer:/app/installer ./installer
docker rm -f installer
```

### Option 2 - use `go run`

```shell
# Get the versions
docker run -it --rm eu.gcr.io/gitpod-core-dev/build/versions:$TAG cat /versions.yaml > versions.yaml
```

For every command below, replace `installer` with `go run . --debug-version-file ./versions.yaml`.

## Generate the base config

```shell
./installer init > gitpod.config.yaml
```

## Customise your config

There are many things you can change in your config, which can be found in
the [Config Guide](#config).

For the purposes of a quickstart, just change the `domain` to one of your
own.

## Validate

```shell
# Checks the validity of the configuration YAML
./installer validate config --config gitpod.config.yaml
```

Any errors here must be fixed before deploying. See [Config](#config) for
more details.

```shell
# Checks that your cluster is ready to install Gitpod
./installer validate cluster --kubeconfig ~/.kube/config --config gitpod.config.yaml
```

Any errors here must be fixed before deploying. See [Cluster Dependencies](#cluster-dependencies)
for more details.

## Render the YAML

```shell
./installer render --config gitpod.config.yaml > gitpod.yaml
```

## Deploy

```shell
kubectl apply -f gitpod.yaml
```

After a few minutes, your Gitpod installation will be available on the
specified `domain`.

## Uninstallation

The Installer generates a ConfigMap with the metadata of every Kubernetes
object generated by the Installer. This can be retrieved to remove Gitpod
from your cluster.

```shell
kubectl get configmaps gitpod-app -o jsonpath='{.data.app\.yaml}' \
  | kubectl delete -f - # Piping to this will delete automatically
```

**Important**. This may leave certain objects still in your Kubernetes
cluster. This will include `Secrets` generated from internal `Certificates`
and `PersistentVolumeClaims`. These will need to be manually deleted.

---

# What is installed

- All Gitpod components
- Container registry*
- MySQL database*
- Jaeger operator*
- RabbitMQ
- Minio object storage*

\* By default, these dependencies are installed if the `inCluster` setting
is `true`. External dependencies can be used in their place

# Config

> Not every parameter is discussed in this table, just ones that are likely
> to need changing. The full config structure is available in [config.go](/installer/pkg/config/v1/config.go).

| Property | Required | Description | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `domain` | Y | The domain to deploy to | This will need to be changed on every deployment |
| `kind` | Y | Installation type to run - for most users, this will be `Full` | Can be `Full`, `Meta` or `Workspace` |
| `metadata.region` | Y | Location for your `objectStorage` provider | If using Minio, set to `local` |
| `workspace.runtime.containerdRuntimeDir` | Y | The location of containerd on host machine | Common values are: <ul><li>`/run/containerd/io.containerd.runtime.v2.task/k8s.io` (K3s)</li><li>`/var/lib/containerd/io.containerd.runtime.v2.task/k8s.io` (AWS/Azure/GCP)</li><li>`/run/containerd/io.containerd.runtime.v1.linux/k8s.io`</li><li>`/run/containerd/io.containerd.runtime.v1.linux/moby`</li></ul> |
| `workspace.runtime.containerdSocket` | Y | The location of containerd socket on the host machine |
| `workspace.runtime.fsShiftMethod` | Y | File system | Can be either `fuse` (fuse-overlayfs) or `shiftfs`. This depending upon your host OS/distribution. If unsure, use `fuse`. |

## Auth Providers

Gitpod must be connected to a Git provider. This can be done via the
dashboard on first load, or by providing `authProviders` configuration
as a Kubernetes secret.

### Setting via config

1. Update your configuration file:

```yaml
authProviders:
  - kind: secret
    name: public-github
```

2. Create a secret file:

```yaml
# Save this public-github.yaml

id: Public-GitHub
host: github.com
type: GitHub
oauth:
  clientId: xxx
  clientSecret: xxx
  callBackUrl: https://$DOMAIN/auth/github.com/callback
  settingsUrl: xxx
```

3. Create the secret:

```shell
kubectl create secret generic --from-file=provider=./public-github.yaml public-github
```

## In-cluster vs External Dependencies

Gitpod requires certain services for it to function correctly. The Installer
provides all of these in-cluster, but they can be configured to use services
external to the cluster.

To use the in-cluster dependency, set `inCluster` to be `true`.

## Container Registry

```yaml
containerRegistry:
  inCluster: false
  external:
    url: <url of registry>
    certificate:
      kind: secret
      name: container-registry-token
```

The `container-registry-token` secret must contain a `.dockerconfigjson`
key - this can be created by using the `kubectl create secret docker-registry`
[command](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/pull-image-private-registry/#create-a-secret-by-providing-credentials-on-the-command-line).

## Database

Gitpod requires an instance of MySQL 5.7 for data storage.

The default encryption keys are `[{"name":"general","version":1,"primary":true,"material":"4uGh1q8y2DYryJwrVMHs0kWXJlqvHWWt/KJuNi04edI="}]`

### Google Cloud SQL Proxy

If using a GCP SQL instance, a [Cloud SQL Proxy](https://cloud.google.com/sql/docs/mysql/sql-proxy)
connection can be used.

```yaml
database:
  inCluster: false
  cloudSQL:
    instance: <PROJECT_ID>:<REGION>:<INSTANCE>
    serviceAccount:
      kind: secret
      name: cloudsql-token
```

The `cloudsql-token` secret must contain the following key/value pairs:
 - `credentials.json` - GCP Service Account key with `roles/cloudsql.client` role
 - `encryptionKeys` - database encryption key. Use default value as above if unsure
 - `password` - database password
 - `username` - database username

### External Database

For all other connections, use an external database configuration.

```yaml
database:
  inCluster: false
  external:
    certificate:
      kind: secret
      name: database-token
```

The `database-token` secret must contain the following key/value pairs:
- `encryptionKeys` - database encryption key. Use default value as above if unsure
- `host` - IP or URL of the database
- `password` - database password
- `port` - database port, usually `3306`
- `username` - database username

## Object Storage

Gitpod supports the following object storage providers:

### GCP

```yaml
metadata:
  region: <gcp-region-code, eg europe-west2>
objectStorage:
  inCluster: false
  cloudStorage:
    project: <PROJECT_ID>
    serviceAccount:
      kind: secret
      name: gcp-storage-token
```

The `gcp-storage-token` secret must contain the following key/value pairs:
- `service-account.json` - GCP Service Account key with `roles/storage.admin` and `roles/storage.objectAdmin` roles

### Azure

> Azure Blob Storage is not S3 compatible. This uses Minio Gateway to
> provide an S3 interface

```yaml
metadata:
  region: <azure-region-code, eg northeurope>
objectStorage:
  inCluster: false
  azure:
    certificate:
      kind: secret
      name: az-storage-token
```

The `az-storage-token` secret must contain the following key/value pairs:
- `accountName` - the globally-unique storage account name
- `accountKey` - access key for the storage account

### S3

> This is currently only tested with AWS. Other S3-compatible providers should
> work but there may compatability issues - please raise a ticket if you have
> issues with other providers

```yaml
metadata:
  region: <aws-region-code, eg eu-west-2>
objectStorage:
  inCluster: false
  s3:
    endpoint: s3.amazonaws.com
    credentials:
      kind: secret
      name: s3-storage-token
```

The `s3-storage-token` secret must contain the following key/value pairs:
- `accessKeyId` - username that has access to S3 account
- `secretAccessKey` - password that has access to S3 account

> In AWS, the accessKeyId/secretAccessKey are an IAM user's credentials with
> `AmazonS3FullAccess` policy

# Cluster Dependencies

In order for the deployment to work successfully, there are certain
dependencies that need to be installed.

## Kernel and Runtime

Your Kubernetes nodes must have the Linux kernel v5.4.0 or above and
have a containerd runtime.

## Affinity Labels

Your Kubernetes nodes must have the following labels applied to them:
- `gitpod.io/workload_meta`
- `gitpod.io/workload_ide`
- `gitpod.io/workload_workspace_services`
- `gitpod.io/workload_workspace_regular`
- `gitpod.io/workload_workspace_headless`

It is recommended to have a minimum of two node pools, grouping the `meta`
and `ide` nodes together and the `workspace` nodes together.

## TLS certificates

It is a requirement that a certificate secret exists, named as per
`certificate.name` in your config YAML with `tls.crt` and `tls.key`
in the secret data. How this certificate is generated is entirely your
choice - we suggest [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/) for
simplicity, however any certificate authority can be used by creating a
Kubernetes secret.

The certificate must be associated with the following domains (where
`$DOMAIN` is the value in config `domain`):
 - `$DOMAIN`
 - `*.$DOMAIN`
 - `*.ws.$DOMAIN`

See [FAQs](#how-do-i-use-cert-manager-to-create-a-tls-certificate) for help
with creating a TLS certificate using cert-manager.

### cert-manager

cert-manager **MUST** be installed to your cluster. In order to secure
communication between the various components, the application creates
internally which are created using the cert-manager `Certificate` and
`Issuer` Custom Resource Definitions.

```shell
helm repo add jetstack https://charts.jetstack.io
helm repo update
helm upgrade \
    --atomic \
    --cleanup-on-fail \
    --create-namespace \
    --install \
    --namespace='cert-manager' \
    --reset-values \
    --set installCRDs=true \
    --set 'extraArgs={--dns01-recursive-nameservers-only=true,--dns01-recursive-nameservers=8.8.8.8:53\,1.1.1.1:53}' \
    --wait \
    cert-manager \
    jetstack/cert-manager
```

# FAQs

## Why are you writing your own Installer instead of using Helm/Kustomize/etc?

The Installer is a complete replacement for our Helm charts. Over time,
this had grown to be too complex to effectively support and was a barrier
to entry for new users - the base config was many hundreds of lines long
and did not have effective validation on it. By contrast, the Installer's
config is < 50 lines long and can be fully validated before running.

Also, by baking-in the container image versions to each release of the
Installer, we reduce the potential for variance making it easier to support
the community.

## How do I use Cert Manager to create a TLS certificate?

> Please see [cert-manager.io](https://cert-manager.io) for full documentation.
> This should be considered a quickstart guide.

There are two steps to creating a public TLS certificate using cert-manager.

### 1. Create the Issuer/ClusterIssuer

As the certificate is a wildcard certificate, you must use the DNS01 Challenge
Provider. Please consult their [documentation](https://cert-manager.io/docs/configuration/acme/dns01)
for instructions. This can be either an
[`Issuer` or `ClusterIssuer`](https://cert-manager.io/docs/concepts/issuer).

### 2. Create the certificate

Replace `$DOMAIN` with your domain. This example assumes you have created a
`ClusterIssuer` called `gitpod-issuer` - please change this if necessary.

This certificate is called `https-certificates` - please use that in your
Gitpod installer [config](#config).

```yaml
apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
kind: Certificate
metadata:
  name: https-certificates
spec:
  secretName: https-certificates
  issuerRef:
    name: gitpod-issuer
    kind: ClusterIssuer
  dnsNames:
    - $DOMAIN
    - "*.$DOMAIN"
    - "*.ws.$DOMAIN"
```

## How do I use my own TLS certificate?

If you don't wish to use cert-manager to create a TLS certificate with a public
certificate authority, you can bring your own.

To do this, generate your certificate as you would normally and then create a
secret with the CRT set to `tls.crt` and the Key set to `tls.key`.

The DNS names must be `$DOMAIN`, `*.$DOMAIN` and `*.ws.$DOMAIN`, where `$DOMAIN`
is your domain.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: https-certificates
data:
  tls.crt: xxx
  tls.key: xxx
```

## How can I install to a Kubernetes namespace?

By default, Gitpod will be installed to the `default`
[Kubernetes namespace](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/namespaces).
To install to a different namespace, pass a `namespace` flag to the `render`
command.

```shell
./installer render --config gitpod.config.yaml --namespace gitpod > gitpod.yaml
```

**IMPORTANT**: this does not create the namespace, so you will need to create
that separately. This is so that uninstallation of Gitpod does not remove any
Kubernetes objects, such as your TLS certificate or connection secrets.

```shell
kubectl create namespace gitpod
```

# I need to add additional configuration to my load balancer - what do I do?

By default, this will create a `proxy` service with `ServiceType: LoadBalancer`.
If you want to specify your own ingress, you can do this easily by changing
your Installer configuration:

```yaml
components:
  proxy:
    serviceType: ClusterIP
```

This will set the `ServiceType` to `ClusterIP` allowing you to create your own
ingress controller.

# Todo

PRs/comments welcome

- [ ] [Improve distribution of gitpod-installer binaries](https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/issues/6766)
- [ ] [Create a Gitpod workspace that can be used for installing a Gitpod instance](https://github.com/gitpod-io/gitpod/issues/6801)
